SEND-TO-STATA.md, before:

# Send Code to Stata

Send Stata code from Zed editor to the Stata GUI application for execution.

## Prerequisites

- **macOS** (required for AppleScript)
- **Stata** installed in `/Applications/Stata/` (StataMP, StataSE, StataIC, or Stata)
- **jq** for JSON manipulation (`brew install jq`)
- **python3** (used to safely handle shell metacharacters in selections)
- **Zed** editor

## Quick Start

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jbearak/sight-zed
cd sight-zed
./install-send-to-stata.sh
```

The installer will:
1. Copy `send-to-stata.sh` to `~/.local/bin/`
2. Add Zed tasks to `~/.config/zed/tasks.json`
3. Add keybindings to `~/.config/zed/keymap.json`
4. Detect your installed Stata variant

## Keybindings

In `.do` files:

| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `cmd-enter` | Send current statement (or selection) to Stata |
| `shift-cmd-enter` | Send entire file to Stata |
| `alt-cmd-enter` | Include statement (preserves local macros) |
| `alt-shift-cmd-enter` | Include file (preserves local macros) |
| `shift-enter` | Send selection to Stata terminal (quick paste) |
| `opt-enter` | Send current line to Stata terminal (quick paste) |

### Quick Terminal Shortcuts

The `shift-enter` and `opt-enter` shortcuts use Zed's `SendKeystrokes` to paste code into the active terminal panel:

- **`shift-enter`**: Copies the current selection, switches to the terminal (`ctrl-``), pastes, executes, and switches back
- **`opt-enter`**: Selects the current line, copies it, switches to the terminal, pastes, executes, switches back, and moves to the next line

These shortcuts paste directly into whatever terminal is active in Zed. To use them with Stata, open a terminal panel and launch the Stata CLI (e.g., `stata`, or `stata-mp`). This is particularly useful for:

- **Remote sessions**: When working over SSH, the GUI shortcuts control your local machine. These terminal shortcuts send code to the remote Stata session in your terminal.
- **Multiple sessions**: You can have multiple terminal tabs running different Stata instances and send code to whichever is active. The GUI shortcuts always target the single Stata GUI application.

Note that `opt-enter` sends only the current line—it doesn't detect multi-line statements with `///` continuations like the GUI shortcuts do. For multi-line statements, select the text and use `shift-enter`. The two separate shortcuts exist due to a Zed limitation (SendKeystrokes can't conditionally check for a selection).

### do vs include

The default keybindings use Stata's `do` command, which isolates local macros to the executed code. The `alt` variants use `include` instead, which preserves local macros in the calling context—useful for debugging when you need to inspect locals after running code.

### Statement Detection

When no text is selected, `cmd-enter` sends the current statement:
- Single-line statements are sent as-is
- Multi-line statements using `///` continuation markers are detected automatically
- The cursor can be on any line of a multi-line statement

## Configuration

### Stata Variant

The script auto-detects your Stata installation by checking `/Applications/Stata/` for:
1. StataMP
2. StataSE
3. StataIC
4. Stata

To override, set the `STATA_APP` environment variable:

```bash
# Add to ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc
export STATA_APP="StataSE"
```

### PATH Setup

If `~/.local/bin` is not in your PATH, add it:

```bash
# Add to ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

### Stdin Size Limit

When sending a selection via stdin (`--stdin`), the script enforces a size limit to avoid accidental huge payloads.

- Default: 10MB
- Configure via:

```bash
export STATA_STDIN_MAX_BYTES=10485760
```

### Cleanup on AppleScript Failure

By default, temp `.do` files are kept even if AppleScript fails (useful for debugging). To delete the temp file when AppleScript fails:

```bash
export STATA_CLEANUP_ON_ERROR=1
```

## Manual Installation

If you prefer not to use the installer:

1. Copy the script:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
   cp send-to-stata.sh ~/.local/bin/
   chmod +x ~/.local/bin/send-to-stata.sh
   ```

2. Add tasks to `~/.config/zed/tasks.json`:
   ```json
   [
     {
       "label": "Stata: Send Statement",
       "command": "python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.exit(0 if os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\") else 1)' && python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.stdout.write(os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\"))' | send-to-stata.sh --statement --stdin --file \"$ZED_FILE\" || send-to-stata.sh --statement --file \"$ZED_FILE\" --row \"$ZED_ROW\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     },
     {
       "label": "Stata: Send File",
       "command": "send-to-stata.sh --file-mode --file \"$ZED_FILE\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     },
     {
       "label": "Stata: Include Statement",
       "command": "python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.exit(0 if os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\") else 1)' && python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.stdout.write(os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\"))' | send-to-stata.sh --statement --include --stdin --file \"$ZED_FILE\" || send-to-stata.sh --statement --include --file \"$ZED_FILE\" --row \"$ZED_ROW\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     },
     {
       "label": "Stata: Include File",
       "command": "send-to-stata.sh --file-mode --include --file \"$ZED_FILE\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     }
   ]
   ```
   > **Note**: The "Send Statement" and "Include Statement" tasks use stdin mode (`--stdin`) to handle Stata compound strings (e.g., `` `"text"' ``) and other shell metacharacters correctly. The command must not inline the selection into the zsh command line; use an environment read (e.g. via `python3`) rather than Zed interpolation to avoid parse errors when the selection contains backticks.

3. Add keybindings to `~/.config/zed/keymap.json`:
   ```json
   [
     {
       "context": "Editor && extension == do",
       "bindings": {
         "cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Send Statement"}]]],
         "shift-cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Send File"}]]],
         "alt-cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Include Statement"}]]],
         "alt-shift-cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Include File"}]]],
         "shift-enter": ["workspace::SendKeystrokes", "cmd-c ctrl-` cmd-v enter ctrl-`"],
         "opt-enter": ["workspace::SendKeystrokes", "cmd-left shift-cmd-right cmd-c ctrl-` cmd-v enter ctrl-` down"]
       }
     }
   ]
   ```

   > **Note**: The keybindings use `action::Sequence` to save the file before sending to Stata, ensuring the latest changes are executed. The `shift-enter` and `opt-enter` shortcuts use `SendKeystrokes` for quick terminal interaction without saving.

## Troubleshooting

### "No Stata installation found"

- Verify Stata is installed in `/Applications/Stata/`
- Or set `STATA_APP` environment variable to your Stata application name

### "jq is required but not installed"

Install jq with Homebrew:
```bash
brew install jq
```

### "command not found: send-to-stata.sh"

Add `~/.local/bin` to your PATH (see Configuration section above), then restart your terminal.

### Code doesn't execute in Stata

- Ensure Stata is running before sending code
- Check that the correct Stata variant is detected (or set `STATA_APP`)

## Uninstall

```bash
./install-send-to-stata.sh --uninstall
```

This removes:
- `~/.local/bin/send-to-stata.sh`
- Stata tasks from `~/.config/zed/tasks.json`
- Stata keybindings from `~/.config/zed/keymap.json`

## Temp File Cleanup

The script creates temporary `.do` files in your system temp directory (`$TMPDIR`). These files are not automatically deleted because Stata needs time to read them.

To clean up old temp files:

```bash
# View temp files
ls -la $TMPDIR/stata_send_*.do

# Remove all temp files
rm $TMPDIR/stata_send_*.do
```

Consider adding periodic cleanup to your shell config or using a cron job.

Commit message:

docs: Clarify Stata code sending modes and improve documentation
- Update README to explain both Stata application and terminal session modes
- Expand SEND-TO-STATA.md with detailed description of two supported modes
- Replace "GUI" terminology with "application" for consistency and clarity
- Clarify that application shortcuts work on macOS via AppleScript
- Explain terminal shortcuts work with SSH and multiple Stata instances
- Improve distinction between application-targeted and terminal-targeted workflows
- Better document use cases for each sending method

SEND-TO-STATA.md, after:

# Send Code to Stata

Send Stata code from Zed editor to Stata for execution. Supports two modes:
- **Stata application** (macOS): Uses AppleScript to send code to the Stata app
- **Terminal sessions**: Pastes code into the active terminal (works with SSH, multiple sessions)

## Prerequisites

- **macOS** (required for AppleScript)
- **Stata** installed in `/Applications/Stata/` (StataMP, StataSE, StataIC, or Stata)
- **jq** for JSON manipulation (`brew install jq`)
- **python3** (used to safely handle shell metacharacters in selections)
- **Zed** editor

## Quick Start

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jbearak/sight-zed
cd sight-zed
./install-send-to-stata.sh
```

The installer will:
1. Copy `send-to-stata.sh` to `~/.local/bin/`
2. Add Zed tasks to `~/.config/zed/tasks.json`
3. Add keybindings to `~/.config/zed/keymap.json`
4. Detect your installed Stata variant

## Keybindings

In `.do` files:

| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `cmd-enter` | Send current statement (or selection) to Stata |
| `shift-cmd-enter` | Send entire file to Stata |
| `alt-cmd-enter` | Include statement (preserves local macros) |
| `alt-shift-cmd-enter` | Include file (preserves local macros) |
| `shift-enter` | Send selection to Stata terminal (quick paste) |
| `opt-enter` | Send current line to Stata terminal (quick paste) |

### Quick Terminal Shortcuts

The `shift-enter` and `opt-enter` shortcuts use Zed's `SendKeystrokes` to paste code into the active terminal panel:

- **`shift-enter`**: Copies the current selection, switches to the terminal (`ctrl-``), pastes, executes, and switches back
- **`opt-enter`**: Selects the current line, copies it, switches to the terminal, pastes, executes, switches back, and moves to the next line

These shortcuts paste directly into whatever terminal is active in Zed. To use them with Stata, open a terminal panel and launch the Stata CLI (e.g., `stata`, or `stata-mp`). This is particularly useful for:

- **Remote sessions**: When working over SSH, the application shortcuts control your local Stata. These terminal shortcuts send code to the remote Stata session in your terminal.
- **Multiple sessions**: You can have multiple terminal tabs running different Stata instances and send code to whichever is active. The application shortcuts always target the single Stata app.

Note that `opt-enter` sends only the current line—it doesn't detect multi-line statements with `///` continuations like the application shortcuts do. For multi-line statements, select the text and use `shift-enter`. The two separate shortcuts exist due to a Zed limitation (SendKeystrokes can't conditionally check for a selection).

### do vs include

The default keybindings use Stata's `do` command, which isolates local macros to the executed code. The `alt` variants use `include` instead, which preserves local macros in the calling context—useful for debugging when you need to inspect locals after running code.

### Statement Detection

When no text is selected, `cmd-enter` sends the current statement:
- Single-line statements are sent as-is
- Multi-line statements using `///` continuation markers are detected automatically
- The cursor can be on any line of a multi-line statement

## Configuration

### Stata Variant

The script auto-detects your Stata installation by checking `/Applications/Stata/` for:
1. StataMP
2. StataSE
3. StataIC
4. Stata

To override, set the `STATA_APP` environment variable:

```bash
# Add to ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc
export STATA_APP="StataSE"
```

### PATH Setup

If `~/.local/bin` is not in your PATH, add it:

```bash
# Add to ~/.zshrc or ~/.bashrc
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

### Stdin Size Limit

When sending a selection via stdin (`--stdin`), the script enforces a size limit to avoid accidental huge payloads.

- Default: 10MB
- Configure via:

```bash
export STATA_STDIN_MAX_BYTES=10485760
```

### Cleanup on AppleScript Failure

By default, temp `.do` files are kept even if AppleScript fails (useful for debugging). To delete the temp file when AppleScript fails:

```bash
export STATA_CLEANUP_ON_ERROR=1
```

## Manual Installation

If you prefer not to use the installer:

1. Copy the script:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
   cp send-to-stata.sh ~/.local/bin/
   chmod +x ~/.local/bin/send-to-stata.sh
   ```

2. Add tasks to `~/.config/zed/tasks.json`:
   ```json
   [
     {
       "label": "Stata: Send Statement",
       "command": "python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.exit(0 if os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\") else 1)' && python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.stdout.write(os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\"))' | send-to-stata.sh --statement --stdin --file \"$ZED_FILE\" || send-to-stata.sh --statement --file \"$ZED_FILE\" --row \"$ZED_ROW\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     },
     {
       "label": "Stata: Send File",
       "command": "send-to-stata.sh --file-mode --file \"$ZED_FILE\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     },
     {
       "label": "Stata: Include Statement",
       "command": "python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.exit(0 if os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\") else 1)' && python3 -c 'import os,sys; sys.stdout.write(os.environ.get(\\\"ZED_SELECTED_TEXT\\\", \\\"\\\"))' | send-to-stata.sh --statement --include --stdin --file \"$ZED_FILE\" || send-to-stata.sh --statement --include --file \"$ZED_FILE\" --row \"$ZED_ROW\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     },
     {
       "label": "Stata: Include File",
       "command": "send-to-stata.sh --file-mode --include --file \"$ZED_FILE\"",
       "use_new_terminal": false,
       "allow_concurrent_runs": true,
       "reveal": "never",
       "hide": "on_success"
     }
   ]
   ```
   > **Note**: The "Send Statement" and "Include Statement" tasks use stdin mode (`--stdin`) to handle Stata compound strings (e.g., `` `"text"' ``) and other shell metacharacters correctly. The command must not inline the selection into the zsh command line; use an environment read (e.g. via `python3`) rather than Zed interpolation to avoid parse errors when the selection contains backticks.

3. Add keybindings to `~/.config/zed/keymap.json`:
   ```json
   [
     {
       "context": "Editor && extension == do",
       "bindings": {
         "cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Send Statement"}]]],
         "shift-cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Send File"}]]],
         "alt-cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Include Statement"}]]],
         "alt-shift-cmd-enter": ["action::Sequence", ["workspace::Save", ["task::Spawn", {"task_name": "Stata: Include File"}]]],
         "shift-enter": ["workspace::SendKeystrokes", "cmd-c ctrl-` cmd-v enter ctrl-`"],
         "opt-enter": ["workspace::SendKeystrokes", "cmd-left shift-cmd-right cmd-c ctrl-` cmd-v enter ctrl-` down"]
       }
     }
   ]
   ```

   > **Note**: The keybindings use `action::Sequence` to save the file before sending to Stata, ensuring the latest changes are executed. The `shift-enter` and `opt-enter` shortcuts use `SendKeystrokes` for quick terminal interaction without saving.

## Troubleshooting

### "No Stata installation found"

- Verify Stata is installed in `/Applications/Stata/`
- Or set `STATA_APP` environment variable to your Stata application name

### "jq is required but not installed"

Install jq with Homebrew:
```bash
brew install jq
```

### "command not found: send-to-stata.sh"

Add `~/.local/bin` to your PATH (see Configuration section above), then restart your terminal.

### Code doesn't execute in Stata

- Ensure Stata is running before sending code
- Check that the correct Stata variant is detected (or set `STATA_APP`)

## Uninstall

```bash
./install-send-to-stata.sh --uninstall
```

This removes:
- `~/.local/bin/send-to-stata.sh`
- Stata tasks from `~/.config/zed/tasks.json`
- Stata keybindings from `~/.config/zed/keymap.json`

## Temp File Cleanup

The script creates temporary `.do` files in your system temp directory (`$TMPDIR`). These files are not automatically deleted because Stata needs time to read them.

To clean up old temp files:

```bash
# View temp files
ls -la $TMPDIR/stata_send_*.do

# Remove all temp files
rm $TMPDIR/stata_send_*.do
```

Consider adding periodic cleanup to your shell config or using a cron job.
